The last method that I will introduce you to in this section is called the logit lens.
It's a very simple, yet clever insight to peer into the transformations of the embeddings vectors,
and in particular, how each token or token embedding vector gets slowly transformed into a prediction
for the subsequent token.
It's also like lots of other analyses you learn about in this course, quite versatile in the sense
that there's a lot you can do once you understand the basic framework of how this analysis works.
So in this video, I will explain the concept and show one application in code, and in the next video
you will extend the analyses using missing token predictions in a Bert model.
And if you like this approach in general, then I will also give you the link for the post that described
this method initially, where you can also find several other applications and inspirations for what
to do with the logit lens.
So here again is an overview of an LM.
And what I want to stress in this slide is that the results of the final transformer block is transformed
into an embeddings matrix, from which tokens are selected.
But why is the embeddings matrix attached to the final transformer block?
Well, okay, that's probably a stupid question.
It wouldn't make any sense to attach the embeddings matrix to the first transformer block, because
then what is the point of all the other transformer blocks?
Or maybe it's not such a stupid question.
Maybe if we took the output of the transformer block one And put that output right into the embeddings
matrix.
Maybe that would tell us what kinds of tokens the model would predict for the next token, if it couldn't
fully finish processing the token embeddings.
Well, that is exactly the idea of the logit lens, and that's what I'm depicting here.
So remember that the output dimensionality of each transformer block matches the dimensionality of the
embeddings matrix.
And so the only reason why the embeddings are attached to the final transformer block is that that's
where we've finished processing.
And that's what the model has been trained to have as the final transformer, the final set of transformations.
So the idea of the logit lens is to decode the output of an earlier transformer block, and hopefully
that can yield some insights into the calculations performed at each transformer layer.
By the way, in popular descriptions, this approach has sometimes been inappropriately called mind
reading or reading the thoughts of an LLM.
I get why journalists would write things like that, because they're looking for attention grabbing
headlines to get clicks online.
But please do not use that kind of loose end, inappropriate and unscientific language in a formal or
scientific context.
Anyway, you can actually decode at any layer you want, not just the first or the final transformer
transformer.
And so the idea of the logit lens is to process some text, grab all of the hidden state activations,
and then push those activations through the embeddings and get the predicted tokens even before we fully
finished processing those embeddings vectors.
Here is the post on the website lesswrong that initially described this procedure.
You can find this page by googling the title or by looking in the code file.
The Python code demo file for this video, and I've pasted the direct link into that notebook file.
It doesn't take too long to read, and it comes with some Python code that you can use to get started.
They also propose several additional analyses that you can perform with this approach.
And what I'm going to do in the Python demo here is just introduce you to one of the analyses.
So in particular here is what you will see in the Python demo.
I'll start by importing GPT two, writing a little bit of text and then pushing that through the model.
We need the hidden states here, but we don't need any of the intermediate activations within a transformer
block.
So we don't need any hooks or anything.
So then what I will do is just focus on transformer block three and calculate the log softmax probabilities
for when the model processes the token do.
So the way you do anything and that is the fourth word in this text.
So we're going to basically see how the model internally processes this token and generates a prediction
for what the next word should be.
Now we already know that the next token is the word anything.
And the question is already at transformer block three.
Do we get some sensible prediction for the next token after the word do?
Now you have seen plots that look like this before, but previously in the course.
This kind of plot always showed the final output logits.
So at the very end of the model and this here, these data are actually coming from one of the earlier
transformer blocks.
So the question that we are asking here is if we cut the model at exactly layer three, what would be
the next token prediction.
Well, the maximum softmax value in this case corresponds to the token.
It.
Now on the one hand, that is categorically incorrect.
When we look at the text, we see that the word anything comes after the word do.
But on the other hand, this word is certainly context appropriate.
So the way you do it.
So the model is clearly already making some kind of context appropriate prediction for the subsequent
token.
And this is only at transformer block three out of 12.
So we can repeat this kind of analysis over all the words and over all the layers, and we can get a
visualization that looks like this.
So what you see here are the tokens with the largest softmax for each word in the text, and the bottom
row shows the target token in each position.
So the model sees the word the and it's supposed to predict that the subsequent token is the word way.
Now ideally the output of layer 12 would be more or less the correct token sequence.
And that would match the target sequence.
In this case, it doesn't really work that well because it's a fairly short piece of text.
So there isn't a whole lot of context to leverage.
And this is only GPT two small, but it does write some interesting text.
And it's interesting to see how the tokens transform over the course of internal processing.
Now, the color behind each little piece of text each token corresponds to the scaled Logsoftmax values.
I will have more to say about all of this in the code, so let's switch to Python and see how this analysis
works.
Here are the libraries that we need.
Here I'm importing GPT two small and switching it to eval mode.
And let's see.
Here is the text we will use to work with in this demo.
The way you do anything is the way you do everything.
I like that quote a lot.
Uh, here I am tokenizing the text, and here I'm pushing the text through the model or pushing the
tokens through the model.
Now, this is a small model.
It's a small piece of text.
It takes a very little time to go through.
We absolutely do not need the GPU for this code file or really this analysis.
It's generally pretty fast unless you're running a ton of text through.
Okay, so this code here is just serving to confirm that we have gotten a sensible result.
So the number of hidden states that we have is 13.
Of course, you know, that corresponds to the output of the embeddings matrix, the initial token plus
position embeddings.
And then we have the 12 transformer blocks.
And then here within any one of these blocks I'm just picking this one.
We have one sequence of 11 tokens and 768 dimensions.
Here is the URL to the report that, as far as I am aware, first proposed and described this method
of the logit lens.
Okay.
So here is the basic analysis.
This is just for one layer.
And I'll extend it to all the layers in a little bit.
So I'm grabbing the activations the outputs from one transformer block here I'm just using three.
This zero here is for.
That's for this here.
This is the first sequence in this batch.
But the batch is only one.
So this just helps reduce the matrix size a little bit okay.
And here I'm getting the embeddings matrix.
So model for language model underscore weight I'm going to have a few things to say about this in a
moment.
But first I want to show you how easy it is to calculate the logits at any of the layers.
So we get out the final activations, and then we simply multiply by the transpose of the embeddings
matrix and the size of this matrix.
Here this variable logits is 11 by 50,000.
And basically that corresponds to the 11 tokens in this text.
And each of those tokens has a logit projecting to each of the elements in the vocab.
So all the tokens in the vocab, that's 50,257 tokens.
So then basically what we want to do is see for each of these tokens, what is the largest value of
or which token has the largest logit.
The largest projection okay.
Now one quick note about this here.
So where do we get that from.
That comes from here is the entire model.
You can see most of this is the transformer here at the end of the transformer is the final layer norm
after the last transformer block.
And then we get to this part of the model LM underscore head.
This is an non-linear.
It is literally nothing more than one matrix.
It's just one matrix of numbers.
And when we transpose this matrix, that's what we multiply with the final output logits.
And this is what we are multiplying by all of the other logits.
So the output of all these other 12 transformer blocks.
Now I'm going into detail about this because you will see in the next video in the code challenge.
In the next video, we are going to be using the Bert model instead of the OpenAI GPT model.
And this is going to look a little bit different.
So these two lines of code here, this works for GPT like OpenAI's GPT style embeddings matrix.
And in the next video you will see it's conceptually the same with Birch.
But the implementation is a little bit different.
Okay, so pin that in the back of your brain.
We'll get back to that in the next video.
Okay.
So now what I'm going to do is create the figure that I showed in the slides.
So from these logits, from this output of the one of the transformer blocks, I am log softmax to get
log softmax outputs.
And then I find the maximum of these logsoftmax outputs for the fourth token.
So the token of index three and all of the vocab elements.
Now uh, just something to remember.
Logsoftmax is a non-linear transformation, but it is a monotonic transformation.
So the maximum here is the maximum here which is the maximum of this before the logsoftmax.
So technically you do not need to transform these logits in order to make a prediction for the next
token.
But I'm transforming it here mainly for visualization.
And that's also the reason why I will do it the way I set it up in the next slide.
Okay.
So here we see, for the token following do, which is the fourth token in this text.
The predicted next token is the word not, which is not the same as the word it, which is what I showed
in the slides a moment ago.
Uh, I don't, uh, I think I just did something different when I created the slides.
But anyway, uh, it's fine.
You can certainly imagine that when the model sees the token do, it's reasonable to think that the
next token could be not.
So although this is not correct, this is not categorically the correct answer.
Again, it's not complete nonsense, right?
Because this word does often follow this word.
Okay.
Very nice.
So this, uh, analysis that I've shown you so far is for one token.
For one layer.
So now to expand this to the full logit lens analysis is super straightforward.
All we need to do is run this again over all of the tokens and then over all the layers.
Pretty straightforward.
So that's what I do in this code cell over here.
So, uh, let's see.
This is a loop over all of the layers.
Actually it's not all of the layers.
We skip the first layer.
And why do we skip the first layer of the hidden states?
I'm sure you guessed it.
The reason is that the first layer.
So hidden states zero.
That is the output of the embeddings, the token plus position embeddings.
It really doesn't make any sense to take those initial embeddings vectors and then immediately plug
them into the embeddings matrix.
There hasn't been any transformations at that point, so that's not going to be terribly useful or insightful.
So therefore we just skip the first one.
And we are only interested in the analysis starting from the first transformer block.
Okay, then here I calculate the logits exactly as I showed above.
Here I'm finding the maximum.
So argmax for each of these logits.
So this variable here predicted next talks.
This is going to tell me for each of the 11 tokens what is the model's maximum projection onto the vocab.
So in other words what is the prediction for the next token.
Okay.
And then yeah.
So you can see here I'm not calculating logsoftmax because I really only need the maximum over here.
I actually am calculating softmax.
But that's not for the analysis.
That's for a visualization that I will show you later on.
That's for the text heatmap okay.
So here I'm getting all of the softmaxes from the logits.
And here I am storing for this layer and for all of the tokens in the sequence.
You can see I'm looping through all of the predicted next tokens and then getting the softmax from the
predicted token.
So yeah, this is just for visualizing the color behind the selected text or the predicted text in the
next that I'll show a little bit below.
Okay.
And then here I'm actually decoding the text.
So getting the predicted next tokens.
These are indices.
And now here I'm transforming those into text.
And then appending that onto this list over here.
And what does that list look like.
Uh it is actually a list of lists where each list in this list of lists contains a bunch of words.
And these are all of the predictions for the subsequent token.
So this is for, uh, transformer block one.
This is transformer block two and so on.
This is not a very useful way to visualize the results of this analysis.
So therefore we'll do some other visualizations.
Here I'm actually just printing it out.
This is the original text.
The way you do anything is the way you do everything.
Here are the predictions at the first transformer block.
The way the the else the the way the the the.
It has a nice rhythm to it, but it is not very sensible.
And then at the final transformer block we have to do it is to same.
You do it.
It's a little bit more sensible than this, but it's not really that sensible.
You will see in the code challenge in the next video that Bert does a much better job at this than GPT
two small.
I think you could also try this with GPT two large or XL, and probably this would work better.
Okay, so now the last thing I'm going to do is the visualization with a heat map.
So let's see.
Let me actually first create this.
Now this code here looks a little bit different from some of the other heat maps that I have created
in this course.
In particular, I do not have this initial cell code cell where I am doing some stuff to identify the
width of a letter.
And the reason why this approach is simpler here is that I'm actually just creating a grid of of words
of tokens.
So we don't actually need to have all of the spacing.
We don't need to deal with different letters and different sizes of words and so on.
So this is just a little bit simpler okay.
Anyway, the point is that here you see the output of each layer for the maximum prediction.
And the color behind each of these words or each of these tokens corresponds to the softmax probability
that I extracted from that for loop over all of the different layers.
So if we would slice the model at transformer block six, then and then just decode its outputs, we
would get the the can not else not same you can a else again a little clunky.
Uh maybe you can make a song out of that, but it's not really very insightful as text.
Okay.
Yeah.
In general, GPT two small does not do super well on tasks like this.
You will see that, uh, Bert, uh, does, uh, quite a bit better.
And pretty interesting how Bert performs in the logit lens.
So that's the basics of the logit lens analysis in the code challenge.
In the next video, you will continue exploring this analysis method in the Bert model.